Today
it is my privilege to interview Mr. Ching Hing,
former president of the Republic of Cambodia.
Sir, would you please briefly summarize your
early years? Yeah. When I finished high school in
my country, I went to the college and I got my law
diploma about 1940.
Where did you actually receive your higher
education? What college? In Cambodia. And your
father was? My father was a farmer and a mayor in my
country. A mayor and a farmer.
What business interests did you pursue prior to
entering politics?
At
that time, I thought When I enter in politics, I can
help more. I have more means to help people because
I'm like agriculture, you know? Okay.
So your motivation to enter politics was helping
the people? Yeah. Okay. How... Did you find it
hard? to come from your background and work your
way all the way up to working in politics. Was that
unusual in Cambodia? Is there a strict class
system in Cambodia that would make that hard? No,
no. No? We don't have any . OK. And about the
politics, you asked me what party, and that time we
have only unique party, one party. Yes, sir. Yeah.
Was it called the Democratic Party? No, it's a
national party. They have to compete
themselves, not about the right, the party. Who
was looked upon as the leader of that party? Was
there any one person who? At that time, it was . And
he was king at that time also. Yes, he was king.
After that, he uptake from king to be a chef of the
party, unique party. It
is an extraordinary achievement to rise to the
presidency of one's country. To what do you credit
your success to?
In America,
if somebody rises to such a height of success,
where they have such a great influence and
importance on their country, then we want to know
how they think they got there, if it was through
background of their parents, or if it was through
education, or if it was some personal values that
they had that they felt helped them to get that far.
You know, I never had the ambition to be the
president, you know, because my country was
the kingdom, you know. In the politics, we can
promote to the president of the National
Assembly, like I let you know. We have to
participate in elections. And at that time, the
people know me, I was very popular in agriculture,
because my country relies on agriculture. Now I
would like to be president of the National
Assembly because the people push me to be that
president because they know and they fund the
price of the grain, the produce, as we call it in my
country. I help the people,
you know. protest against the price of fertilizer
too high. and the low price of the rice, you know.
And the people, you know, I had a lot. From zero, I
made a lot of propaganda to explain to the people to
buy tractor, to flow, you know. Before my country
fell, we had about 5,000 tractor. You know, but
before, For one hectare, the ground to flow, it
takes very long, you know? And because they use
oxygen, you know, to flow. And with tractor, they
flow very fast. It takes, before, by oxygen, It
takes five years to finish a boat. One on a guitar,
you know? Because a lot of grass, a lot of bushes or
something, you know? And with tractor, they flow
very fast. They work fast. And the production
increase. And the peasants was very happy, you
know? And they push me to be... President, you
know, of the Assembly National. So popular
opinion is what, and your help in agriculture and
helping the people is what made them like you so
much. I'm a son of a peasant. I'm a farmer myself,
and I know the problem for the farmer, you know?
Right. And I help them to the right way, you know?
Was it uncommon for the
Prince Sinahook Was he not a people's person?
Were the people looking more for somebody to lead
them closer?
Were
the people looking for someone to help them more?
personally? Was the government at that time
insufficient at helping the villagers? Yeah, you
know, I'd like to know. When Ren Hsien Loong, he
time he challenged the government, he asked me to
be an agricultor, you know. He know, he said, you
know, I have experience in agriculture. Because
not only I have experience, but I study a lot. I
travel a lot. Because I would like to improve the
economy of my country. Not only we stay on
agriculture, but I explain to my people, you have
to prepare to grow. of the plant we can use in the
industry before we go to another set, you know,
because to industrialize the country. And that
time I bought the seed from other country for
cotton from here. And sugarcane plant from other
country, you know. And coffee from Brazilian. And
it fit well in my country. And they are very happy.
And we try to modernize the agriculture. We have a
lot, a lot of orange, but traditional, you know. We
send to study here or to in Europe, you know, to try
to tell the people. And that use method of
selection, modernization, you know. We had a lot
of people. Like, you know, before you grow mango or
you grow coconut, it takes about 10 years to have
fruits. With modern system, you know, on eight
months, you have fruits. Yeah. Yeah. And coconut,
two year and a half, you have fruits. Because of
that, the people are very happy, you know. the
agriculture made a big difference in Cambodia's
economy? Yeah, yeah, because we rely on
agriculture, you know, we export all the products
to other countries, to Europe, to Africa, to Hong
Kong, Singapore, and other countries.
What was the first civil service office you held?
Yeah.
This explains me a little
more about it. In your job interview,
it has civil service work in 1940. And we were
wondering what that entailed. What kind of job
were you doing at that time? At that time, I was
young, a little different from here, like a small
governor. I was
assistant or juvenile governor in a small
district. But at that time, the district was in the
capital of the big province of Thailand. After I
have been here, a week after that, I have a from
Japanese and Thai government, you know? At that
time, we have war. Yeah. And you know, Japanese
side with Japan, Thai side with Japan. Germany,
you know, and we had five, and after that, we lose
that war, and we lose all big province at that time,
you know, 1940, 1940. After that, in 1942, I, we,
that province to Thailand, and I moved to another
province.
Did you serve mainly in agriculture during that
time? No. This didn't have anything to do with
agriculture. In that time, we had war, you know. I
cannot take care. Right. Yeah. But after that, I
moved to another province, but we still At that
time, we don't have any material, we don't have any
gasoline, we don't have any peanut food. And I work
a lot, a lot with the people to grow something new,
to hire the people to grow cotton, to grow
something, to grow local. Yeah, I have a lot of
experience with the clothes of the people. And
when food, we grow, you know, peanuts, we grow all
over here. We grow rice, for the government to use
in the war, you know, to replace gasoline, to
replace, to sell in army, you know.
And from that, but I have my background, because
I'm a peasant, you know, son, and each vacation I
went home, I work with my father, I work with my
parents to grow rice, to grow all things. I have
some experience, but after I go to work at the that
province, we still have war, you know, and we don't
have any products imported from other countries,
you know. You don't know very well, but Europe has
restrictions, you know, to supply for food,
because it's a hard time to have food. But my people
still...
They were still growing something. But at that
time, my country was a French colony, French
protectorate.
I worked under the French government.
And at this time, the French were occupying
Cambodia. No, no. You know, the French
protectorate, they don't occupy. He let us. work,
but in all the country have high, yeah, high man,
called resident superior, or governor, big
governor, and in Peruvian we have a
representative of the governor. I see. Okay.
Well, how powerful was the Cambodian government
during the French occupation?
During the French occupation, I think this is not
true. Not true. The French protectorate, you
know. Yeah, the politics was directed by the
French, you know, and also the economy. But under
Sasson, we have, like, I don't know, we have a
governor for for all the country and
small for each province. And they take care of
military and economic, you know, and political.
But we still, we work under the order of So
y'all,
there
wasn't a big conflict with the French in Cambodia?
Y'all,
Prince Sinahook was for independence from
France. Yeah, you know, in that time, we have, you
know, wake up from most of the country in the world,
not only for France, for England, for other
country, you know. India was... It looked like
Cambodia, you know, Myanmar, all the countries,
most of the countries were Africa. And from that,
Prasen was the king, and he worked a lot against the
French protectorate. And from 1954, we have
Cambodian independence.
Did y'all still maintain friendly relations with
friends? Yeah.
We maintained a relationship with friends, you
know, and friends still help. But you know, France
is a small country, you know, the size is smaller
than Texas, you know, and they cannot afford to
help us like America,
you know. Okay.
How did you perceive Prince Sinuhuk as a leader?
Because you know Sinuhuk was king, and after that
he resigned from king to be chief of party, and
after that he was, he assumed his position by
president. Did you back
him up?
Were you one of his strong supporters? Yeah,
because most, I think all the Cambodian people
about him. Because you know Cambodian not like
other country. One nationality, Cambodian. One
religion, Buddhist, you know. They don't have,
like, automotive, have Islamic or, uh, a lot of
ethnic, no. They only have in Cambodia. But, you
know, unfortunately, we live right through the
Communists, you know? And, uh, the people don't
like Communists, but, you know, when they come
with the people, you know, they have to accept.
Right. Yeah. Um, did Prince Sinnehook's previous
kingship and his royal background was that um a
strong reason for his popular popularity in
cambodia yeah i think i support him he was very
popular he did the blessing for the country you
know but you know in politics after that he didn't
move before He said Cambodia is a neutral country,
and that we have more, a lot of support, you know?
And you know, it's one leader, in Asia. You have Chu
Ying Lai or Mao Zedong in China. You have Sukarno in
Indonesia. You have Nehru in India. You have
I can't recall
his name.
President
Tito.
Yeah.
He was one of five or six leaders, very popular in
the world, you know.
But, you know, he had a lot of contact with
communism, and he moved, he moved, moved a little,
you know, a little bit, a little bit, you know. And
because of that, I had a problem.
OK. I've heard that you debated Prince Sinahook.
What was the nature of these debates? What do you
mean? Debate.
Let's see. who arbitrate or discuss issues.
Yeah.
Looking back, do you believe that Cambodia's
policy of neutrality was a beneficial policy?
Yeah, I think now, you know, now I think it's the
wrong place for us, you know, not before. Now we
have to let go. by
Switzerland, or she had not seen Europe before.
One, you know, of the Chinese in China was a Chinese
man from Vietnam. He moved to Thailand, not the
same country. Yes.
And
the fact that sometimes we live with the world, you
know, because we don't know the smart life, how we
live our lives, we don't know the life, you know, to
live like us, we don't know the life. From
reading some of the history, it seems like that was
a constant struggle of Cambodia to be able to
maintain a policy of neutrality between the
communist and the pro-West, like America. Seems
like the two different powers were constantly
pulling Cambodia, trying to win them to one side.
Do you think there's any way y'all could avoid that
kind of conflict? You know, you look a lot in the
book and all, and before, we don't have the
politics like this, but we still have problems,
you know, and problems and questions, so, you
know. The neighbor, well, you know, Cambodia was a
very rich country, you know, and you remember this
is not far from 1854. South Vietnam was Cambodia,
you know, the name of the country, you know. And
after that, France instead to bring back,
to give
back
to Cambodia, we give back to Myanmar. We have about
2 million Cambodian people who have a large
Buddhist over there. You know, and the land is very
fertile, you know. And now, you know,
not enough people who
like to analyze COVID. And before we have the
territory of Cambodia to Bangkok. And a lot of
Cambodian people live in that area.
Would it have been possible for Cambodia to have
prohibited North Vietnam's use of the Ho Chi Minh
Trail
in Cambodia
where the North Vietnamese were using the borders
of Cambodia to receive arms and aid for their
communist movement. Is there any way y'all could
have prevented them, or any reason why y'all would
like to? You know, because of that, you know, I like
to know, he was really popular. I support, all the
people support him. He was smart. But when he
decided alone to let the communists use that way to
send weapons, to send all things to support the
communists first, Ho Chi Minh way, and second,
through Siena port, you know, from that, before
the 100, you know, because that pushed Siena to be
out of Cambodia, you know. And also, he reject for
that, he decide every day more and more to the
communists. I'm hearing a rich head from the
United States. Was this the, would you consider
this one of the first steps to the communists being
able to get into Cambodia to its final takeover of
Cambodia? Would this be one of the first, would you
say? Yeah, yeah, they, you know, If we don't have a
dam like this, we already cannot, the government
cannot fund, you know, this one. And also, you
know, maybe, you know, himself, he don't, you
know, we don't know. People like to sign and to...
This way, because he made a mistake himself. He
believed the communists were very bad at that
time, you know? But from your country, you have
some problems, you know? And because a lot of
communists spent a lot of money to pay propaganda.
Right. This, you lose this by weapon, but you lose
people by political propaganda, you know?
Because most of the people, they don't know
Cambodia, they don't know, but they protest They
have manifestation, they have protestation in
front of the American embassy, in front of the
other place. Again and again they want, you know.
But I talk a lot in church, in school, in
university, I explain. When, you know, the
government calm down, four or five people have a
lot. protestation in front of American embassy.
When the communists killed every day, thousands
and thousands, now maybe more than four million,
no one protest. Because we don't do mad propaganda
like the communists, you know? Yes. And the
people, the people is very nice people, they don't
know. When they saw the newspaper, they saw it,
they were like, oh, we would like to have peace, we
don't like to have war. But not true, you know.
Because I know you lose this because of my
propaganda. Also, people protest against the
government who make newspaper. They share these
terrible things every day, every day. And one day
when they have enough war, they take over your
country like me, you know? Yeah. You know, the
smartest people in the world is the shaman people,
you know? You know? There are a lot, elite people,
marshal, general, or admiral. He was killed by
Italy, a small one. Because one they use for, one
they use with one. You cannot react, you know. But I
explain to American people, be careful, you know.
Don't let the people, you know, exploit the
situation.
This is the freedom, the most freedom in the
country. You have justice, equality, all things
matter. But you remember, not one behavior. You
know, like you drive car, you have speed limit. In
democracy, in your position, you have limit. But
you don't have some. You pass the limit. Like
media, like news people. Some earn a lot of money
and they don't respect it, you know? First, the
money, and they don't respect the answers of the
country, you know? It's the most important
country in the world. But, will I help you?
is
one of the factors, you know, in human beings. And
although you do get to be a conscious person, you
are obsessed with mental distancing, with a
balance to work for others, to question yourself.
And now, you know, you've got to think more about
it. Yeah.
And some, you know, have twenty years, sixty years
of experience. But, you know, there are actually
some, you know, and some, you know, I, My Majesty, I
don't know, I don't know. Man must stay long, man
must stay long, man must stay long, and to work more
for your interest. I've
seen them as well,
I've talked to them before. Give them only one
moment, you know, one time, like this. These four
moments, you know, to give. Four, five, six, one
moment. One movement, praise God. You
work for the country, you work for the regulation,
you know, like Senegal, you know, you know, what do
you like? I don't, I don't like to do something to
write a paper, to write a paper, I don't like to
write a paper, I don't like to say things like that.
.
. . . .
You
don't know? You don't know about the
constitution? You say like this? .
. . . . Because
you cannot live, you know, like a prisoner. You
have to live something. But when you arrive in
life, you have to live something that then you
know.
You
know, it's not true. I think it's just that time to
know God. Please, you've got to be lucky to
experience, you know, to be lucky to speak with the
people, to write, you know, to believe. It's the
best. Why? You know, you have to live it, you know.
Once you've known the Spirit, you live it, or you
drive a car, you live that way. to
be able to catch this matter. It's not that easy,
you know. And it's not to be done over and over
again. In fact, when you say that, yes, it's not
that easy, you see. Two or three times you use this,
or something, two or three days, oh, in the pool,
you know, you know, first you sit down, put this
paper to... Was
one,
no. involved
in the ouster of
Prince Seneca? Yeah, I
think so. I don't know why he was so much involved in
the ouster of Prince Seneca. Because he had a
policy of all kinds.
Are
you
all working directly with Prince Sinahil right
now, or what is he affiliated with? You know, I
was...
May
he forget all things and live to the end of his life.
.
. . . . . . . . . He
will
be, though, a prominent factor in a new Cambodia.
No, I don't think so. You know, he lived in Guam. He
lived in Guam. He lived in Guam. He lived in Guam.
Now,
self-believer, he said, all the time. What's
that? I don't know. You
know, the communists in my country, in Guam, you
know, we practice this. We practice it, and we use
the man as a shield. We control, and we work. We try,
and we work inside. We practice, and we use the man
as a shield.
.
. . So,
sinhood was more or less betrayed by the Congress.
Because,
you know, I...